README.md, before:

# OpenAura 🐧

> **Give your AI a memory and a shell.**  
> OpenAura makes AI assistants personal by adding persistent memory, Linux system access, and an empathy engine—all safely sandboxed in Docker.

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Python 3.11+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-009688.svg?logo=fastapi&logoColor=white)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/)
[![Docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/docker-2496ED.svg?logo=docker&logoColor=white)](https://docker.com/)

```bash
# One-line setup
git clone https://github.com/mattstyles333/openaur.git && cd openaur && cp .env.example .env && docker-compose up -d
```

---

## What is OpenAura?

LLMs are incredible at reasoning, but they have a major limitation: **they don't know you**. Every conversation starts from scratch. They can't see your system, remember your preferences, or actually do things on your behalf.

**OpenAura bridges that gap.**

It's a self-hosted AI assistant that:
- 🧠 **Remembers everything** - Conversations, preferences, system state via OpenMemory
- 🐧 **Works with your Linux system** - Install packages, run commands, manage services
- 💬 **Adapts to your mood** - Empathy engine adjusts tone based on sentiment
- 🔒 **Runs in a sandbox** - Docker container keeps your host system safe
- 🔌 **Works with any LLM** - OpenRouter integration (Claude, GPT-4, DeepSeek, etc.)

Think of it as giving your favorite LLM a long-term memory and a bash shell, wrapped in a nice API.

---

## Why OpenAura?

### The Problem with Chatbots

You know the drill. You spend 20 minutes explaining your nginx setup to ChatGPT, it gives you great advice, you fix the issue. A week later, same problem happens. You open a new chat and... **start from zero.** It doesn't remember your config, your architecture, or that conversation.

**OpenAura solves this.** It persists context across sessions, so your AI actually learns about you and your systems over time.

### When to Use OpenAura vs Others

| Use Case | Best Tool | Why |
|----------|-----------|-----|
| General knowledge questions | Latest LLMs (ChatGPT, Claude, etc.) | Optimized for broad reasoning |
| Your specific system setup | **OpenAura** | Remembers your configs, packages, preferences |
| Installing/configuring Arch packages | **OpenAura** | Native AUR integration, can actually run commands |
| Complex reasoning tasks | Latest LLMs | State-of-the-art models |
| Long-running automation | **OpenAura** | Tmux-based async execution |
| Code review across sessions | **OpenAura** | Remembers your codebase context |

**Bottom line:** OpenAura isn't trying to replace those tools. It's for when you want an AI that knows *your* systems and can *actually do things* for you.

---

## Key Features

### 🧠 Cognitive Memory (OpenMemory)

Unlike cloud AI that forgets when you close the tab, OpenAura remembers:
- **Conversations** - Context across sessions
- **Preferences** - How you like things configured
- **System state** - What packages are installed, your configs
- **CLI tools** - Every command you've taught it

```python
# Example: Month 1
User: "I need to analyze nginx logs"
OpenAura: "I see you have nginx installed. Checking /var/log/nginx/error.log..."

# Month 3, same user
User: "That nginx issue again"
OpenAura: "Looking at your nginx setup... same config from March? 
           Let me check if that SSL cert renewal script I wrote for you is still working."
```

### 🐧 Arch Linux Native

Built for Arch users who live in the terminal:
- **AUR support** - Install any package via yay
- **System-aware** - Knows what's installed
- **Tmux execution** - Run long tasks async
- **Auto-discover** - Crawls man pages to learn your tools

```bash
# Make OpenAura aware of your tools
make crawl BINARY=git
make crawl BINARY=docker
make crawl BINARY=your-custom-script

# Now it can help you use them
make chat MSG="What's the safest way to rewrite my last 3 git commits?"
```

### 💬 Empathy Engine

Analyzes your sentiment and adapts:
- **Frustrated?** → Calm, step-by-step guidance
- **Excited?** → Matches your energy
- **Confused?** → Patient explanations with examples
- **Focused?** → Concise and technical

```bash
curl http://localhost:8000/heart
# { "mood": "focused", "empathy_level": 0.8 }
```

### 🔒 Docker Sandbox

Everything runs in containers:
- ✅ Your API keys stay local
- ✅ Can't accidentally break your host system
- ✅ Easy to wipe and restart
- ✅ Network isolated by default

---

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Docker & Docker Compose
- OpenRouter API key ([free at openrouter.ai](https://openrouter.ai/keys))

### 30-Second Setup

```bash
# 1. Clone
git clone https://github.com/mattstyles333/openaur.git
cd openaur

# 2. Configure
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env: OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your_key_here

# 3. Start
docker-compose up -d

# 4. Test
make test
# ✅ Health check passed
```

### First Conversation

```bash
make chat MSG="What can you help me with?"

# Or register a tool first
make crawl BINARY=git
make chat MSG="How do I undo my last commit safely?"
```

---

## Example Interaction

```
$ openaur chat

╔═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║         Personal AI Assistant with Arch Linux              ║
╚═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝

You: My nginx is broken after the update

OpenAura: I see you're frustrated. Let me check your setup...

🔍 Found: nginx 1.25.3 (installed via pacman)
📄 Config: /etc/nginx/nginx.conf (modified 2 days ago)
📊 Last conversation: "Setting up SSL certificates" (3 weeks ago)
⚠️  Error in config: worker_connections exceeds limit

I remember you prefer fixing root causes over band-aids. 
The issue is your nginx config expects more connections than 
your system allows. Two options:

1. Lower worker_connections in nginx.conf (quick fix)
2. Increase system limits in /etc/security/limits.conf (proper fix)

Which would you prefer? I can apply either.
```

---

## API Endpoints

OpenAI-compatible + custom extensions:

| Endpoint | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `/v1/chat/completions` | OpenAI-compatible chat |
| `/chat` | Enhanced with memory & empathy |
| `/memory/query` | Search your memory |
| `/packages/search` | Find Arch/AUR packages |
| `/packages/install` | Install packages |
| `/actions/crawl` | Learn a CLI tool |
| `/agents/spawn` | Run task in background |
| `/heart` | Empathy status |

[Full API docs →](https://mattstyles333.github.io/openaur/docs/)

---

## Common Use Cases

### Arch Linux Users
```bash
# "Find me a terminal with GPU support"
make search QUERY=alacritty

# "What broke after my update?"
make chat MSG="Check pacman.log for errors from yesterday"
```

### Developers
```bash
# "How do I squash these commits?"
make chat MSG="Interactive rebase last 3 commits"

# "Review this code"
make chat MSG="Check src/main.py for issues"
```

### DevOps
```bash
# "Check all my services"
make chat MSG="Which systemd services are failing?"

# Background task
openaur agents spawn server-monitor
```

---

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Docker Container (sandboxed)                              │
│                                                             │
│   ┌────────────┐    ┌───────────┐    ┌──────────────────┐   │
│   │  FastAPI   │───▶│  Gateway  │───▶│  OpenRouter LLM  │   │
│   │   Server   │    │           │    │  (Claude/GPT-4)  │   │
│   └────────────┘    └───────────┘    └──────────────────┘   │
│          │                                                  │
│          ▼                                                  │
│   ┌────────────┐    ┌───────────┐    ┌──────────────┐     │
│   │ OpenMemory │    │   yay     │    │    tmux      │     │
│   │  (SQLite)  │    │  (AUR)    │    │  (async)     │     │
│   └────────────┘    └───────────┘    └──────────────┘     │
│                                                             │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Components:**
- **FastAPI** - REST API server
- **OpenRouter** - Access to best LLMs (Claude, GPT-4, etc.)
- **OpenMemory** - Persistent cognitive layer
- **yay** - Arch/AUR package management
- **tmux** - Background task execution
- **Empathy Engine** - Sentiment analysis

---

## CLI Usage

```bash
# Server
openaur server start      # Start containers
openaur server logs       # View logs

# Chat
openaur chat              # Interactive mode
openaur chat "message"    # One-shot

# Packages
openaur packages search <query>
openaur packages install <name>

# Actions (CLI registry)
openaur actions crawl <binary>
openaur actions list

# Development
ruff check . && ruff format .  # Lint & format
```

---

## Configuration

`.env` file:

```bash
# Required
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your_key_here

# Optional
DEBUG=false
OPENMEMORY_DB_PATH=./data/openmemory.db
```

---

## Development

```bash
# Build locally
make build

# Run with logs attached
make run-logs

# Reset everything
make reset-db

# Run tests
make test
```

---

## Contributing

Contributions welcome! See [AGENTS.md](AGENTS.md) for code guidelines.

1. Fork it
2. Branch: `git checkout -b feature/cool-thing`
3. Commit: `git commit -m 'Add cool thing'`
4. Push: `git push origin feature/cool-thing`
5. PR it

---

## Roadmap

- [ ] Web UI (no CLI required)
- [ ] Plugin system
- [ ] Voice interface
- [ ] More distros (Ubuntu, Fedora)
- [ ] Kubernetes deployment
- [ ] Team/multi-user support

---

## License

MIT - See [LICENSE](LICENSE)

---

## Acknowledgments

**OpenAura stands on the shoulders of giants:**

### Core Stack
- [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) - The high-performance web framework
- [Typer](https://typer.tiangolo.com/) - CLI framework for the terminal interface
- [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/) - Data validation
- [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/) - Database toolkit
- [Uvicorn](https://www.uvicorn.org/) - ASGI server

### Terminal & UI
- [Rich](https://github.com/Textualize/rich) - Beautiful terminal formatting
- [Open WebUI](https://github.com/open-webui/open-webui) - Web interface companion

### AI & Memory
- [OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/) - Universal LLM API
- [OpenMemory](https://github.com/yourusername/openmemory) - Cognitive memory layer

### System Tools
- [tmux](https://github.com/tmux/tmux) - Terminal multiplexer for async tasks
- [yay](https://github.com/Jguer/yay) - AUR helper for package management
- [Arch Linux](https://archlinux.org/) - Foundation OS
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) - Container sandbox
- [psutil](https://github.com/giampaolo/psutil) - System monitoring

### Python Ecosystem
- [httpx](https://www.python-httpx.org/) - HTTP client
- [PyYAML](https://pyyaml.org/) - YAML parsing
- [python-jose](https://github.com/mpdavis/python-jose) & [passlib](https://passlib.readthedocs.io/) - Security
- [aiofiles](https://github.com/Tinche/aiofiles) - Async file operations

**To all open source maintainers: thank you for sharing your work.**

---

## Questions?

- 🐛 [Issues](../../issues)
- 💬 [Discussions](../../discussions)
- 📖 [Website](https://mattstyles333.github.io/openaur/)
- 📚 [Docs](https://mattstyles333.github.io/openaur/docs/)

**[⭐ Star this repo](https://github.com/mattstyles333/openaur)** if you find it useful!

Commit message:

docs: Update comparison section to focus on OpenClaw
- Replace generic 'When to Use' table with specific OpenClaw comparison
- Frame OpenClaw as the main competitor/pioneer in local-first AI agents
- Show clear differentiation: OpenClaw = general agent, OpenAura = Linux-specific with memory
- Maintain respectful tone - both tools have their place

README.md, after:

# OpenAura 🐧

> **Give your AI a memory and a shell.**  
> OpenAura makes AI assistants personal by adding persistent memory, Linux system access, and an empathy engine—all safely sandboxed in Docker.

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Python 3.11+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-009688.svg?logo=fastapi&logoColor=white)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/)
[![Docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/docker-2496ED.svg?logo=docker&logoColor=white)](https://docker.com/)

```bash
# One-line setup
git clone https://github.com/mattstyles333/openaur.git && cd openaur && cp .env.example .env && docker-compose up -d
```

---

## What is OpenAura?

LLMs are incredible at reasoning, but they have a major limitation: **they don't know you**. Every conversation starts from scratch. They can't see your system, remember your preferences, or actually do things on your behalf.

**OpenAura bridges that gap.**

It's a self-hosted AI assistant that:
- 🧠 **Remembers everything** - Conversations, preferences, system state via OpenMemory
- 🐧 **Works with your Linux system** - Install packages, run commands, manage services
- 💬 **Adapts to your mood** - Empathy engine adjusts tone based on sentiment
- 🔒 **Runs in a sandbox** - Docker container keeps your host system safe
- 🔌 **Works with any LLM** - OpenRouter integration (Claude, GPT-4, DeepSeek, etc.)

Think of it as giving your favorite LLM a long-term memory and a bash shell, wrapped in a nice API.

---

## Why OpenAura?

### The Problem with Today's AI Assistants

You know the drill. You spend 20 minutes explaining your nginx setup to Claude or ChatGPT, it gives you great advice, you fix the issue. A week later, same problem happens. You open a new chat and... **start from zero.** It doesn't remember your config, your architecture, or that conversation.

**OpenAura solves this.** It persists context across sessions, so your AI actually learns about you and your systems over time.

### Compared to OpenClaw

[OpenClaw](https://github.com/mezoistvan/OpenClaude) pioneered local-first AI agents—but OpenAura extends that vision specifically for **Linux system integration and memory persistence**.

| Capability | OpenClaw | OpenAura |
|------------|----------|----------|
| **Philosophy** | Local-first AI agent | Personal AI with memory + Linux tools |
| **Cognitive Memory** | Limited session context | Persistent SQLite-backed memory |
| **System Access** | Basic file operations | Full Arch Linux + AUR package management |
| **Terminal Integration** | Standard CLI | Tmux-based async execution |
| **Emotional Adaptation** | No | Sentiment-aware empathy engine |
| **Package Management** | No | Native AUR integration via yay |
| **Action Discovery** | Manual tool registration | Auto-crawl CLI documentation |
| **Sandboxing** | Local execution | Docker container isolation |

**Choose OpenClaw if:** You want a lightweight, general-purpose local AI agent.

**Choose OpenAura if:** You want an AI that knows your Arch Linux system, remembers everything about your setup, and can actually manage packages and run commands for you.

---

## Key Features

### 🧠 Cognitive Memory (OpenMemory)

Unlike cloud AI that forgets when you close the tab, OpenAura remembers:
- **Conversations** - Context across sessions
- **Preferences** - How you like things configured
- **System state** - What packages are installed, your configs
- **CLI tools** - Every command you've taught it

```python
# Example: Month 1
User: "I need to analyze nginx logs"
OpenAura: "I see you have nginx installed. Checking /var/log/nginx/error.log..."

# Month 3, same user
User: "That nginx issue again"
OpenAura: "Looking at your nginx setup... same config from March? 
           Let me check if that SSL cert renewal script I wrote for you is still working."
```

### 🐧 Arch Linux Native

Built for Arch users who live in the terminal:
- **AUR support** - Install any package via yay
- **System-aware** - Knows what's installed
- **Tmux execution** - Run long tasks async
- **Auto-discover** - Crawls man pages to learn your tools

```bash
# Make OpenAura aware of your tools
make crawl BINARY=git
make crawl BINARY=docker
make crawl BINARY=your-custom-script

# Now it can help you use them
make chat MSG="What's the safest way to rewrite my last 3 git commits?"
```

### 💬 Empathy Engine

Analyzes your sentiment and adapts:
- **Frustrated?** → Calm, step-by-step guidance
- **Excited?** → Matches your energy
- **Confused?** → Patient explanations with examples
- **Focused?** → Concise and technical

```bash
curl http://localhost:8000/heart
# { "mood": "focused", "empathy_level": 0.8 }
```

### 🔒 Docker Sandbox

Everything runs in containers:
- ✅ Your API keys stay local
- ✅ Can't accidentally break your host system
- ✅ Easy to wipe and restart
- ✅ Network isolated by default

---

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Docker & Docker Compose
- OpenRouter API key ([free at openrouter.ai](https://openrouter.ai/keys))

### 30-Second Setup

```bash
# 1. Clone
git clone https://github.com/mattstyles333/openaur.git
cd openaur

# 2. Configure
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env: OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your_key_here

# 3. Start
docker-compose up -d

# 4. Test
make test
# ✅ Health check passed
```

### First Conversation

```bash
make chat MSG="What can you help me with?"

# Or register a tool first
make crawl BINARY=git
make chat MSG="How do I undo my last commit safely?"
```

---

## Example Interaction

```
$ openaur chat

╔═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║         Personal AI Assistant with Arch Linux              ║
╚═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝

You: My nginx is broken after the update

OpenAura: I see you're frustrated. Let me check your setup...

🔍 Found: nginx 1.25.3 (installed via pacman)
📄 Config: /etc/nginx/nginx.conf (modified 2 days ago)
📊 Last conversation: "Setting up SSL certificates" (3 weeks ago)
⚠️  Error in config: worker_connections exceeds limit

I remember you prefer fixing root causes over band-aids. 
The issue is your nginx config expects more connections than 
your system allows. Two options:

1. Lower worker_connections in nginx.conf (quick fix)
2. Increase system limits in /etc/security/limits.conf (proper fix)

Which would you prefer? I can apply either.
```

---

## API Endpoints

OpenAI-compatible + custom extensions:

| Endpoint | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `/v1/chat/completions` | OpenAI-compatible chat |
| `/chat` | Enhanced with memory & empathy |
| `/memory/query` | Search your memory |
| `/packages/search` | Find Arch/AUR packages |
| `/packages/install` | Install packages |
| `/actions/crawl` | Learn a CLI tool |
| `/agents/spawn` | Run task in background |
| `/heart` | Empathy status |

[Full API docs →](https://mattstyles333.github.io/openaur/docs/)

---

## Common Use Cases

### Arch Linux Users
```bash
# "Find me a terminal with GPU support"
make search QUERY=alacritty

# "What broke after my update?"
make chat MSG="Check pacman.log for errors from yesterday"
```

### Developers
```bash
# "How do I squash these commits?"
make chat MSG="Interactive rebase last 3 commits"

# "Review this code"
make chat MSG="Check src/main.py for issues"
```

### DevOps
```bash
# "Check all my services"
make chat MSG="Which systemd services are failing?"

# Background task
openaur agents spawn server-monitor
```

---

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Docker Container (sandboxed)                              │
│                                                             │
│   ┌────────────┐    ┌───────────┐    ┌──────────────────┐   │
│   │  FastAPI   │───▶│  Gateway  │───▶│  OpenRouter LLM  │   │
│   │   Server   │    │           │    │  (Claude/GPT-4)  │   │
│   └────────────┘    └───────────┘    └──────────────────┘   │
│          │                                                  │
│          ▼                                                  │
│   ┌────────────┐    ┌───────────┐    ┌──────────────┐     │
│   │ OpenMemory │    │   yay     │    │    tmux      │     │
│   │  (SQLite)  │    │  (AUR)    │    │  (async)     │     │
│   └────────────┘    └───────────┘    └──────────────┘     │
│                                                             │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Components:**
- **FastAPI** - REST API server
- **OpenRouter** - Access to best LLMs (Claude, GPT-4, etc.)
- **OpenMemory** - Persistent cognitive layer
- **yay** - Arch/AUR package management
- **tmux** - Background task execution
- **Empathy Engine** - Sentiment analysis

---

## CLI Usage

```bash
# Server
openaur server start      # Start containers
openaur server logs       # View logs

# Chat
openaur chat              # Interactive mode
openaur chat "message"    # One-shot

# Packages
openaur packages search <query>
openaur packages install <name>

# Actions (CLI registry)
openaur actions crawl <binary>
openaur actions list

# Development
ruff check . && ruff format .  # Lint & format
```

---

## Configuration

`.env` file:

```bash
# Required
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your_key_here

# Optional
DEBUG=false
OPENMEMORY_DB_PATH=./data/openmemory.db
```

---

## Development

```bash
# Build locally
make build

# Run with logs attached
make run-logs

# Reset everything
make reset-db

# Run tests
make test
```

---

## Contributing

Contributions welcome! See [AGENTS.md](AGENTS.md) for code guidelines.

1. Fork it
2. Branch: `git checkout -b feature/cool-thing`
3. Commit: `git commit -m 'Add cool thing'`
4. Push: `git push origin feature/cool-thing`
5. PR it

---

## Roadmap

- [ ] Web UI (no CLI required)
- [ ] Plugin system
- [ ] Voice interface
- [ ] More distros (Ubuntu, Fedora)
- [ ] Kubernetes deployment
- [ ] Team/multi-user support

---

## License

MIT - See [LICENSE](LICENSE)

---

## Acknowledgments

**OpenAura stands on the shoulders of giants:**

### Core Stack
- [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) - The high-performance web framework
- [Typer](https://typer.tiangolo.com/) - CLI framework for the terminal interface
- [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/) - Data validation
- [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/) - Database toolkit
- [Uvicorn](https://www.uvicorn.org/) - ASGI server

### Terminal & UI
- [Rich](https://github.com/Textualize/rich) - Beautiful terminal formatting
- [Open WebUI](https://github.com/open-webui/open-webui) - Web interface companion

### AI & Memory
- [OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/) - Universal LLM API
- [OpenMemory](https://github.com/yourusername/openmemory) - Cognitive memory layer

### System Tools
- [tmux](https://github.com/tmux/tmux) - Terminal multiplexer for async tasks
- [yay](https://github.com/Jguer/yay) - AUR helper for package management
- [Arch Linux](https://archlinux.org/) - Foundation OS
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) - Container sandbox
- [psutil](https://github.com/giampaolo/psutil) - System monitoring

### Python Ecosystem
- [httpx](https://www.python-httpx.org/) - HTTP client
- [PyYAML](https://pyyaml.org/) - YAML parsing
- [python-jose](https://github.com/mpdavis/python-jose) & [passlib](https://passlib.readthedocs.io/) - Security
- [aiofiles](https://github.com/Tinche/aiofiles) - Async file operations

**To all open source maintainers: thank you for sharing your work.**

---

## Questions?

- 🐛 [Issues](../../issues)
- 💬 [Discussions](../../discussions)
- 📖 [Website](https://mattstyles333.github.io/openaur/)
- 📚 [Docs](https://mattstyles333.github.io/openaur/docs/)

**[⭐ Star this repo](https://github.com/mattstyles333/openaur)** if you find it useful!
